This is a vision of our future
The fateful day in a far-flung corner of the universe when a probe from Earth
Initiates the first descent onto an alien world
Looking for proof of life beyond our solar system
There are no witnesses, no cheering crowds in the control room a
Decade or more will pass before news finally reaches us back across the dark oceans of space
But the seeds of this mission are already being sold today
By the first generation of scientists bold enough to believe it could be possible
When I look up in the sky and I see not stars. I see planetary systems
Fidel we must understand that the journey to ISO planet is not limited by the laws of physics
They look two planets orbiting distant stars
Searching for an answer to the oldest human question. Are we alone?
Is there life on other worlds and if not, why not and if so how?
This is the first generation in human history where we have the technological ability text to go and answer that great question
This is the story of humanity
Launched into the final frontier by a new breed of adventurers the planet hunters
engineers
explorers and dreamers taking the first steps on an interstellar journey
they will not complete that a
journey of like years and lifetimes to another earth around another
we could not possibly have been forged in the dying throes of stars and
Created in that tremendous explosion and now turn our back on
Looking for other creatures that were formed the same way
I
am Artemis
autonomous robotic exploration
mothership for interstellar space I
Am in the final phase of construction in the International cooperative zone of Earth orbit
I am born of man and woman and I am both
But I am neither
I
Am the first search for life on a planet outside our solar system
I am home
There's been life on earth for the best part of four billion years
The marvelous complex biosphere
Created shaped and reformed by the ever shifting forces of our planet
Since the dawn of science, we've sought out life and studied its remarkable diversity on every inch of the globe
The technology of the 20th century took our search into space as we scoured our
neighboring planets the signs of a second Genesis
And came back empty-handed
But what about beyond our solar system
Could life in all its complexity exist out there on a planet among the stars
Get away what would win the development of human thought if one had not been able to see the stars so
This is an area that inspires dreams
For as long as we've had eyes to see and minds to wonder we've marveled at the bright lights in the sky
But it was only on the eve of the 21st century that a handful of eccentric thinkers
Dared to gaze into the gloom between the stars
Believing planets like our own world could be found there
Michelle Maya was one of them
It says it's all it's very strange in the first half of the 20th century the Astronomy community
The astronomers were convinced that there were few or no planetary systems in the galaxy apart from the solar system
When you went to astronomy meetings or conferences you couldn't tell people which you're working on
If you said you were looking for extrasolar planets
They did snicker and they'd move away like you smelled bad or like you were trying to sell some New Age religion
You know you might have been looking for a little green men at that point
In the 1990s astronomer our Paul Butler was another young radical who gambled his career on the hunt for exoplanets
planets
orbiting stars other than our Sun I
Was working on the problem like 80 or 100 hours a week I I would work on the problem
So intensely that I would have dreams
About the work and you know, it's totally all-consuming
At the heart of the challenge was one fundamental problem
even if there were
exoplanets out there
Scientists knew they'd be impossible to see directly because the brightness of the star would overwhelm the planet
The planets are very small and weak in terms of brightness compared to the star
Therefore getting a direct picture of a planet. Well, that's the great difficulty
One is dazzled by the Stars
To overcome this obstacle astronomers developed an ingenious method of hunting exoplanets by stealth
To detect planet orbiting a star you have to rely on tricks and one of the trick we have been using is
If there is a planet going around the star the star will moved a little bit
Tiny motion and that's the motion you want to detects
In
1994 junior planet hunter didier queloz was michelle
Maya's PhD student on the brink of a breakthrough discovery
Well in 94, we we started this program that was looking about hundred stars with a brand new equipment
I had spent almost four years before building it and designing the software to treat the data
we're serving with the telescope's to get the speed of the star and
Trying to see the tiny change in the speed with time
Kind of wobbling. I would tell us that there is something orbiting that star
Growls day under Montaigne in a way alone because Michelle would in sabbatical
Practically gave me the key of the house because he was not expecting any detection
You can imagine my surprise after just a couple of observations we see that something was a bit strange on that style
It took me six months practically to be convinced that I was real and then I send this message to Michel
I was in a wire see Michel. I think I found a planet
It may not look like it but this little curve is a planet
How my or and colas detected it is a tale of remarkable scientific creativity
New subjects we are here in the Dome of the observed terrible lost
It is here that the discovery of exoplanets began
So decode the planets our bodies that do not emit light by themselves
they only reflect the light received from their star and so we will have to find an
Indirect method to detect the planet. We made an ID effect of our detected a planet
To understand the simple idea behind this
Imagine you're in the back row of the stadium at the Olympics of watching an extremely muscular athlete with arms outstretched
Yaya
Imagine the hammer is the planet the athlete it's down over the chain between them their gravitational bond
The star pulls hard on the planet, but it's not all one way
The planet also pulls on the star in fact was every revolution it's pulling it a little off balance
Using a prism like instrument called a spectrograph this wobble effect can be detected by observing
changes in the color of the light emitted by the star
Shifting towards blue as the star moves closer and red as it moves away
Measuring this oscillation allowed koalas and my or to infer the existence of a planet to calculate its mass the
distance from its star and
the duration of its orbit
It's moving to be here with this instruments which allowed us more than 20 years ago to discover the first exoplanet
I think by detecting the first planet you'd break a psychological frontier in
Science it's is very rare. You cannot change a paradigm and we've changed the paradigm on
The 6th of October 1995 my or and koalas announced their discovery
The first ever exoplanet
Bellerophon
Although they could not see it directly. It's mass suggested. It was a giant gas planet similar to Jupiter
But the distance from its star and the period of its orbit seemed to defy the laws of our solar system
People thought well, this is really bizarre. This must be a total freak because it didn't look like the solar system
It's a big planet like Jupiter, but it orbits a star in four days
Delfy the theory was the formation of giant planets predicted that they would only orbit their star over
extremely long periods of time
It's ten years or more and so it seems completely at odds with the theory of time
In our own solar system giant gas planets exist only in the colder outer orbits whereas
Bellerophon appeared to be tucked in tight against the heat of its star
Much closer, even than mercury is to our Sun
Because it's so close to its star it's really really hard
it's probably something like a word or 2,000 degrees centigrade and there is no solid surface because it's a gas giant so it's not or
Not a good place for life
It's not a place you'd want to visit
Bellerophon was no second earth
But its discovery had opened the window on a new vision of the universe where anything is possible
The exoplanets Miniver B was chosen as the target of my mission
By astronomers who are long since dead
They died believing they had found four
14.7 light-years from Earth a world like ours with liquid water bearing life
I hope that I will prove them, right
When the first exoplanets were found by the wobble method
There was a debate in the Astronomy community some astronomers said this is fantastic a new kind of world
Completely unforeseen in terms of our understanding of planet formation
But another group of astronomers said hold on a minute
We don't think that these are actually planets
In 1999
professor of astronomy
David Charbonneau was just a young grad student at Harvard trying to make his mark in the brand new field of planet-hunting
What he encountered was a minefield
While artists had rushed to bring these new worlds to life
skeptics questioned the astronomers interpretation of their data
What they said was we were being fooled there was in fact a new kind of stellar pulsation and so as the star
expanded and contracted
we were looking at one side of that star and so it appeared that the star was coming towards us and away from us the
Very signal that would be the telltale motion due to an orbiting planet, but in fact had nothing to do with planet at all
What I decided to do was to try to go and resolve this debate
First by looking for the light reflected off of one of these worlds
We tried very hard for a couple years and unfortunately we did not succeed
But then as a second idea what we decided to do was instead of looking for the light bouncing off a planet
Wait for the planet to pass in front of its star and look for that transit
Charbonneau
relocated to Boulder, Colorado
To a small shed in a car park where a basic four inch telescope had been set up by fellow researcher Tim Brown
But I had never done this kind of project before so as a first attempt
I thought what we should do is look at one star where we knew that there was a planet due to the wobble method
But which we hadn't yet looked for to see if in fact the planet passed in front of a star making a transit
Where the wobble method allowed one to infer the mass of an orbiting exoplanet
Charbonneau was attempting to observe the planets shape as it passed across its star in the manner of a partial eclipse
The problem was he knew the odds were stacked against him
Of all the planets that are out there orbiting their stars
We only get to see a tiny fraction
By this transit method the idea is that our line of sight has to be exactly aligned with a planetary orbit
So that each time the planet swings around it'll pass in front of some part of the star
Blocking some of the light and that's the signal we can detect
Tipped off that another so-called hot jupiter-like Bellerophon had been detected by the wobble method
Charbonneau trained his telescope on star HD 2 0 9 4 5 8 and waited praying for a transit
There had been about 10 hot Jupiters discovered at that point
So it seemed like if there really were planets if we weren't being fooled and sooner or later or one of these transits should occur
And right when we predicted based on the Wobble data that a transit would occur that's when we saw this event
Shabba knows transit method was a game-changer
confirming the pioneering discoveries using the wobble method and
silencing the skeptics
The discovery of the transits of HD tour nine four five eight was a big deal in the astronomical community
For the first time we knew the actual mass of the planet we knew its size and we could calculate the density
And
We could compare it to the density of planets in the solar system. So it confirmed that these worlds really were hot Jupiters
They were big gassy planets inflated due to their proximity to their stars
The new-look universe was populating fast inspiring an eager generation of young scientists to join the hunt
Timing is everything
When I was in graduate school
Mid-1990s looking for a project to work on for my PhD thesis
amazingly enough the first reports of planets orbiting sun-like stars were coming around at that time and my
thesis advisor suggested that I work on exoplanets
MIT professor of astrophysics
Sara Seager arrived in the field after the paradigm had already shifted
To her the question was no longer simply are there exoplanets out there? It was could there be one like Earth?
when I want to think I come here to the great lake and you look out on the water and I just think about how
How wonderful life is how fragile life is?
It gives me hope that there's another planet out there where life could really thrive
But what makes our world so special what physical characteristics define our planet
We're looking for a planet that has a solid surface predominantly rocky planet, but we're not expecting another planet to be exactly like Earth
When we talk about the planets we want to find it's one that would be able to host life
Even in the most extreme environments
like here amidst the glaciers of volcanoes of Iceland
The conditions that make organic life possible on earth can be found if you know where to look
Life needs water and we think water is almost everywhere in the universe
However, we find it mainly on the formulas and that's not what we need life as we know it and how will recognize it
Really needs liquid water and that's not obvious because it requires the right conditions of temperature and pressure
Based on everything we know of life on Earth
scientists like Francois fouché, believe that for an
Exoplanet to host liquid water like Earth
It needs to lie within a certain distance from its star the region called the habitable zone
They own
We calculate that if we move the earth just a few percent closer to the Sun the climate would go into overdrive
Because there would be more solar energy
The oceans would be warmer more water vapor more greenhouse effect and very quickly the oceans would totally boil and evaporate
On the other hand if we move the earth a few percent away from the signal it will be colder
There would be more snow more ice and that snow will reflect the sunlight which makes it colder and colder and that
Continues until all the earth gets covered in ice. We call it a snowball earth
The reason earth is suitable for life is not only that it's covered with liquid water and oceans today
But it has been throughout its existence for 4 billion years which allowed life to be born and evolved
The first mathematical model of planet habitability produced in
1979 placed extremely narrow limits on the habitable zone
But recent advances in geological science have broadened at the horizon
Other than being at approximately the right distance from the Sun that the main thing that keeps our Taba table is the carbon cycle
Penn State professor of Geoscience
Jim caste is a world leader in the study of planet habitability and the vital role played by Carlin
On earth carbon in the form of co2
Traps the sun's heat in our atmosphere without it temperatures would plummet to below what life needs to survive
But co2 doesn't just stay in the atmosphere
The trees around us are
photosynthesizing and they're XE
Exchanging every co2 molecule in the atmosphere every 10 or 12 years
but on long timescales
it's what we call the carbonate silicate cycle where co2 in the combined atmosphere ocean system is exchanging with
carbonate rocks
Co2 rich sediment washes into the ocean and is drawn into the Earth's crust at underwater fault lines
Where a final?
geological mechanism
completes the cycle
To have a habitable planet like the earth you really need
A long-term carbon cycle and that has to be driven by
Some process like plate tectonics on the earth that keeps the carbon moving around
When our planet enters an ice age this tectonic feedback restores a habitable climate as
oceans freeze the uptake side of the carbon cycle slows while volcanic activity continues
pumping co2 and heat back into the atmosphere
When you put in the feedback you find out that the habitable zone instead of being very narrow it's actually quite wide and
wide enough that there's a good chance that
Planets around other stars at least one or one or more of them could be within the habitable zone
Costings research had a momentous impact
By expanding the boundaries of the habitable zone the carbon feedback loop
vastly improved the odds of finding an earthlike exoplanet
Where life might be possible?
But the fundamental challenge of identifying an earth-like planet remain
There tiny and therefore much harder to detect compared to the gas giants that our instruments had observed so far
To see these earth sized world's a giant leap forward in technology was required
I
Was a graduate student when the very first planet was discovered
In fact I was at the conference where Michelle mayor made that announcement
NASA astrophysicist, Natalie batalha graduated with a dream
I would say my biggest. Hope was that we find an earth-sized planet orbiting a star very much like our own Sun
In a similar orbit where the conditions for life might be just right
Five
four three
two
Engine start one zero and liftoff of the Delta two rocket with Kepler
On a search for planets in some way like our own
In 2009 scientists launched a formidable new weapon in the hunt for life beyond our solar system
The first dedicated planet hunting telescope Kepler
At the time it was the world's largest digital camera using an array of 95
megapixel sensors to detect the infant Tessa mode dimming of starlight pierced by transiting planets
So powerful that if turned towards earth it could detect a single porch light turning off
More importantly. It was the first instrument capable of detecting rocky earth sized planets
The first two decades of exoplanets was kind of like postage stamp collecting Kepler really changed that
Kepler monitored a select region of our galaxy over a four-year period
By taking a snapshot every 30 minutes like an epic time-lapse photograph
And from that data, we identified over 4,000
periodic transit events that look like viable planets
And in fact, we have confirmed through other follow-up observations that over half of them are indeed
bonafide planets
Kepler delivered not only the first rocky
exoplanets, it revealed brand new kinds of rocky planets like
Kepler 10b
Our first encounter with what scientists would christen lava world
These are rocky worlds same kind of density as Earth's but they're orbiting so close to their star
That the surface temperatures are in excess of that required to melt not just rock but iron
So you've got an entire hemisphere, you know something the size of the Pacific Ocean even larger that is an ocean
But it's not an ocean of water. It's an ocean of molten rock
Kepler was the first celestial census
Extrapolating the data for the surveyed region it gave astronomers a catalog of the exoplanet population
We've learned I think three important things
First we've learned that every star that you see when you look up into the sky at night has at least one planet
The other thing that we have learned is that nature makes small planets more efficiently than large planets
The third thing we've learned
Has to do with the fraction of stars that Harbor Earth's size
potentially habitable planets and we can make the bias corrections to determine that number and what we find is that it's about
22 to 25 percent
At least one planet for every star in the sky
And as many as a quarter of them earth-sized and orbiting within the habitable zone
Kepler revolutionized the way we see the stars
Kepler was the pioneer Kepler
looked for planets transiting sun-like stars and
Kepler looked at a very distant field of stars for four years to try to find a planet like Earth that has a 1 year
orbit
Inspired by the success of Kepler in
2013 NASA joined forces with MIT
Lincoln labs to develop an instrument that could deliver a more detailed survey of nearby
earth-like worlds
The entire field of exoplanets is funneling towards the search for another earth a rocky world
Orbiting a small star preferably in a habitable zone of That star
As the project advanced MIT professor Sara Seager was named deputy
science director of the transiting
exoplanet survey satellite
Aka Tess
Tess wants to find stars that are closer right in our neighborhood actually
the camera has
Lens assembly of seven lens elements that were fracks starlight
Onto a detector then together they make a giant strip
When you think of the sky as a sphere from the bottom of one hemisphere all the way up to the pole?
after one year of doing that tests will flip to the next SEM asphere and
It will then do the same thing. And so over two years test. Aims to study the entire sky
By scanning nearby star systems Tess aims to identify
50 earth-sized exoplanet
candidates for further investigation
But would finding a planet like our earth also mean finding a star like our Sun
All we know of the stars we know from afar all we know of Minerva B is this
It is a rocky planet
1.6 times the size of Earth hosted by a red dwarf star
It's orbital period is 39 earth days
It lies within the habitable zone
It's atmosphere contains carbon dioxide methane water and ozone
It will be full of surprises
After the explosion of discoveries a new question emerged
Could finding the right star be just as crucial as finding the right planet
I think the biggest lie that I was told when I was in school was that the Sun is an average star?
The Sun is not an average star the Sun is much bigger much more luminous much more massive than most stars
Most stars in the galaxy are about a quarter the size of the Sun record of the mass and they only put out one one
thousandth the energy
These are small cool stars burning not yellow like our Sun but red
They're classified as m-type stars or M dwarfs, but most people call them red dwarfs
One of Kepler's earth-sized discoveries planet kepler 186f
Was found to be orbiting such a star
500 light-years from Earth
It's about the same size of the earth and our observations
Tell us that planets the size of Earth are more likely to have a rocky composition
So we imagine this planet as being a rocky planet with a surface a solid surface
It's receiving about the right amount of energy for liquid water to pull on the surface
But it's orbiting a star that's very different than our Sun
Because red dwarfs burn less hot than our Sun the habitable zone tends to be much closer in
But this closeness could spell disaster for life on the planet
The red dwarfs their habitable zones are so close in that the planets have a strong chance of becoming tidally locked and
Synchronously rotating where they show the same face to the star all the time just as the moon shows the same face to the earth
So that that poses problems for habitability, which may be difficult to overcome
When a planet is close to its star the gravitational or tidal force becomes greater
And this can have the effect of locking the rotation of the planet
Meaning one side is always lit by its star while the other remains shrouded in darkness
As well as producing one hot side and one cold
By spinning so slowly the planet may fail to generate an electromagnetic shield which like on earth
protects the planet from radiation
These stars at the same time, you know is supplied they're very much dimmer than the Sun but they're more magnetically active
They give lots off lots of high-energy radiation that may strip the atmosphere off a planet particularly if it's not
protected by a magnetic field
But in 2015
casting and other researchers found reason to hope for life on a tidally locked planet
orbiting a red dwarf
Using sophisticated
climate modeling they proposed that if the planet had the right kind of
Atmosphere then heat could be transferred from the light side to the dark like a reverse cycle air conditioning system
Planet hunters embraced the discovery if life could thrive on a planet around a red dwarf or
M-type star the odds of finding a second earth were vastly improved
M-type stars are the most numerous star in the galaxy?
70% of the stars in our galaxy are these m-type stars? So if
Life can seed itself and get started on these planets then life is going to be ubiquitous in the galaxy
For four months at the beginning of 2016
The SIA telescope in Chile set its sights on the m-type star Proxima Centuri
Ahmir 4.25 light-years from Earth, it's our nearest stellar neighbor
In a machine room deep beneath a telescope light from the star was split by the harps spectrum eater
And
Instruments, so sensitive it picked up the feeblest of wobbles in the dwarf star caused by a tiny earth-sized
planet
próxima be
The discovery came as a revelation
The very closest alien star to earth posts a tidally locked earth-like world and
Calculations reveal that Proxima B is orbiting within the habitable zone
It's an amazing
triumph to discover a planet around our nearest star
Just think about that for thousands of features. People have been wondering are there any planets around other stars?
And there is one around our very nearest star
But what about its atmosphere
Could this planet sustain life?
My last sell of helium-3 propellant is delivered from moon base
My preparations are complete
On earth the world
Astronomical Union is throwing a party for me on the eve of my historic launch
And I am honored and I am alone
Tomorrow I am gone to me Nova
As
the exoplanet goldrush gathered pace
Planet-hunting prospectors sought ever more refined methods of sifting their discoveries in an effort to give a future
Interstellar mission the best possible chance of targeting a world that might actually host life
Having identified a rich new vein of distant planets the next crucial piece of the puzzle was yet to fall into place
How could a telescope be used to sample the atmosphere?
Looking at a planet's atmosphere far away is the best way we have to find signs of life on another world
because the gases that life produces here on earth actually imprint in our atmosphere in a very significant way and
So it's just amazing to think that on another world we can do the same
If you were an alien astronomer
Studying the planets of the solar system you would see that there's something very different about the third planet from the Sun
You would see that its atmosphere is full of oxygen even though you would know that the oxygen couldn't possibly be there by geologic processes
There would be other gases like methane
Which also shouldn't be present and yet there they are and you would we think as we're trying to do
Ourselves when we look at other stars conclude that life was the only possible explanation
In 2000 David sharpener took control of the aging Hubble telescope
Charged with a single but daunting objective to make the first-ever
observation of an exoplanets atmosphere
The transit method of exoplanet detection which Charbonneau had pioneered himself
Provided a clue for how to solve the puzzle
Planets orbiting closely to their stars
Make more frequent transits and the larger the planet the easier it is to detect
so Charbonneau turned the Hubble's gaze towards those Syrus a gas giant the transits every
3.5 days
We had the idea that when the planet passed in front of its star some of the light from the star would pass through
the outer parts of the planet and then imprinted upon that light would be the
Fingerprints of whatever atoms or molecules were present in the atmosphere
Different atoms absorb different light frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum and allow others to pass through
producing a signature in color
No one had ever discovered an exoplanet atmosphere and
So we needed a guess as to what atom or molecule would be
Very prominent would be the easiest first thing to see so there were some predictions
Charbonneau put his money on sodium the tell-tale yellow glow of street lamps
The observations were gathered a few months afterwards and it took more than a year to carefully analyze the data
No, one had ever made this detection before so we wanted to be absolutely certain that what we were seeing was robust
After painstakingly probing the data Charbonneau announced his discovery
The atmosphere around Osiris was indeed rich in sodium
However, this was no second earth
Named after the Egyptian god of the dead
The gas giant Osiris doesn't even have a solid surface to land on let alone the climate of the life
What we crave to do is to study the atmosphere of an earth-like planet
Of course earth-like planets are simply much smaller than gas giants. And so it's just much more difficult to detect them and
to study their atmospheres
It's the hurdle that has thoughted planet hunters from the outset the
blinding light of the Stars
completely overwhelms the smaller
exoplanets
The first instrument to solve that problem will hold the key to the exoplanet
revolution
This telescope will allow us to make a leap forward in several fields of astrophysics
Especially in the field of exoplanets indeed. It will allow us to observe the atmospheres of these exoplanets
The James Webb Space Telescope is designed to view the heavens like they have never been seen before
making the invisible visible
Its vast honeycomb like dish of mirrors converges light into the eye of a state-of-the-art
infrared camera that
astrophysicist Pierre Olivier lagash spent 20 years developing
And an object emits light in a given wavelength according to its temperature
For example the Sun emits in the visible range because it's very hot
If we take a human, it's much cooler and will emit in a different wavelength
mid infrared
And that's why with a so-called thermal or infrared camera. You can see people at night
We don't need lights. We see the heat emitted by a human in the mid infrared
The same is true of exoplanets observe them in the right wavelength and they glow in the dark
But for the infrared vision to work it relies on the truly innovative feature of this telescope
Inside the camera lies James Webb's secret weapon a kind of mask called a coronagraph
It was that this form of masks is very unique the light of the star arrives where it's opaque
On the other hand if you have a small object next to it like an exoplanet
Well, the light will not have exactly the same path and will shine through so
After that, we'll have the light of the exoplanet without the light of the star
So thanks to this corona graphic method. We'll be able to get a direct image of the exoplanets
The mask of the coronagraph intervenes between the overwhelming light of the star like an eclipse
Allowing the infrared light of the planet to shine through
These
Exoplanets have never been seen in this wavelength and yet it's a very interesting field for measuring the temperature of these
objects their luminosity
We can also see the composition
Certain molecules such as ammonia which is in this wavelength range
so the
Characterization of atmospheres will be one of the great focuses of this instrument
Crucial in the hunt for earth-like worlds James Webb is ideally suited for detecting ozone
But why ozone because there's no ozone without oxygen and no oxygen without life
so we think it's really something that is a trace of life and in the middle infrared our telescopes can precisely
detectors this signature of ozone
The James Webb promises to be the missing piece in the planet hunters arsenal
With its breakthrough ability to view an earthlike exoplanet
directly and to study its atmosphere the odds of
Identifying a destination for a future landing mission have never been better
You know I can probably imagine what that would feel like
better than most people can
I've been sending robotic missions to other planets
My whole career 40 years of this but I can't imagine what it would feel like. I mean the the the problem of
Getting a spacecraft with that kind of capability to another star is so much harder
The discoveries of the planet hunters
Transformed the way we see the universe and posed to explorers like Steve Squyres
lead investigator of the Mars rover missions the next
tantalizing question
What if we could reach out to a nearby alien star and search for life on a second earth
What if we could land on another rocky world with running water and a protective earth-like atmosphere
If you can find an earth-like world that has been around for billions of years
Enough time to develop advanced biology. It's had the right conditions all that time. There are all kinds of possibilities
I
Can't imagine what it wouldn't feel like it's gonna be I mean, it's gonna be a shared moment for all of humanity when it happens
Five four three two
One I launch
No fireworks, no trembling
For those of you who are watching this, I thank you for entrusting me with
the greatest adventure in human history
Wish me luck
My mission is simple find life
It was only for graduate students and I was in the undergraduate and I nearly got thrown out of the class the first day
and
got to be I
Don't know three or four weeks into the semester
I think I better start thinking about my term paper and there was this place
Then at the time called the Mars room and it was a place where the pictures from Mars were stored
And I went in and I thought I'll sit down for 15 or 20 minutes and flip through some pictures and see if I can
Come up with an idea for a term paper
Like most scientists
Principal investigator of the Mars rover missions. Steve Squyres is a born Explorer a
seeker of truth
Amidst the great unknown, I mean ever since I was a kid, I've been fascinated by maps. I
Was fascinated by a you know remote corners of Tibet or the deep ocean
Or the other side of the Moon
Just the idea that there was a place that we hadn't seen yet and
then me able to go there and see it for the first time that just
That just had a huge appeal for me
In
1977 images of the Viking mission changed the course of Squires life
You know, it's not like today where pictures come down from Mars and bang. They're on the internet an hour. Later
There were only a few dozen people in the world. Who'd seen these I
didn't understand what I was looking at in the pictures nobody did but then I would see and the pictures these little
Valleys that just looked like they had to obtain carved by liquid water
And I was in that room for four hours and I walked out of there knowing exactly
What I wanted to do with the rest of my life
Point I'm beyond Ram
In the early 2000s Squires led NASA's Spirit and Opportunity rover missions to Mars
Successfully landing the two robot geologists in a bid to uncover the hidden history of water
on the Red Planet
Amid these groundbreaking triumphs an even greater frontier beckons
The discovery of earth-like worlds outside our solar system has transformed the way we see the universe
and
presents an irresistible challenge
Why not reach out even further and search for life on the planet among the stars?
The thing that has driven
the focus of exploration in this solar system has been the search for other forms of life and
So I think the motivation is gonna be the same thing
I think the motivation when you go to other star systems is going to be
habitable worlds and
Possibly worlds with life. That's the thing that's going to
Draw you to a specific world
But the scaleless challenge is unlike anything humankind has attempted before
The closest star that hosts an earth-sized planet Proxima Centauri is
4.3 light years away
over
170,000 times further than Mars
The quest to build a spacecraft that can journey to the Stars
will test the greatest explorers of our generation and
demand of them the ultimate sacrifice to
Give all their craft and vision for a dream. They'll never realize
You're asking people to
Devote their careers their lives to something they will never see to fruition. Now that has happened
That has happened a few times in human history
Some of the great cathedrals of Europe took longer than a human lifespan to build
People felt guided by a higher power when they did that
But it takes something extraordinary to motivate people to do that kind of thing
I enter the shadow of Mars
So Viking colony winking a final farewell from human time
My transceiver dish receives the message moon voyage
I fly by the storm of Jupiter
Onward to Pluto and Chiron and into the space between stars
After three months of acceleration, my speed is 12 miles per second
I meet Voyager 1
170 years and 45 billion miles from Earth
You to shift course
No power to call home
I
Have now traveled further than any spacecraft performing I
Retract my transceiver
There will be no more calls
And press arms through the silence to me never
I
Get up each day
With joy, you know, why because I know that day. I'm going to learn something
I didn't know before and that my picture my overall
tapestry of who we are who I am what our species is and how we got to be that way will be
lifted up
NASA's chief engineer of planetary flight systems Gentry Lee is a pioneer of exploration
At the age of 75 he's dedicated over 50 years of his life
to engineering robotic missions to other planets
Someone asked me one time if I had to describe the excursions above the threshold of joy in my life
Would there be a lot of them are just a few and I said I can give you the two
categories right away the birth of my children and I now have eight and
With a spacecraft that I had a major role in achieved something successfully. There's also been eight of those
Lee's first mission Viking in 1975
Was humanity's opening shot in our dream of exploring the solar system
Designed to achieve what many thought impossible
To make the first ever landing on another planet
Mars
We had lived through five years of people trying it's not gonna work
You don't have everything under control and we were scared to death that it wouldn't work
And the moment that first strip of picture came down from planet Mars on July the 20th of
1976 there were hundreds of us
Immediately spontaneously tears burst from our eyes
It was at that moment that we knew the human beings who had always been a category one species
Limited to their own earth and this sphere of influence had reached out and become a category two
species
Ready to explore the entire solar system
Over the next five decades Lee oversaw successful missions to Jupiter
Pluto and to the comet Tempel 1
With Lee and other pioneers at the helm
Humanities exploration of the solar system has been so successful. We have a permanent office in space
the International Space Station
But as the new dawn of interstellar exploration lights the horizon
Even the old Sea Dogs. No, it will be the greatest challenge that humankind has ever faced
it is hubris on our part to imagine that we can sit today and
define all the steps that lead us to this plethora of
Technology advances that we need in the future to build an interstellar spacecraft
Rather let us do the following thing
That spacecraft must communicate. It must navigate. It must have propulsion
It must have the ability to take data
It's as if Henry the Navigator as the king of Portugal had said I don't even know yet
What kind of ships I need to build or where they need to go. Let me just start with an idea. What floats?
And
So the infinitely complex quest to search for life amongst the Stars is reduced to just four problems
Propulsion
Navigation communication
Intelligence each one of them will demand a revolution
I am nine years into my journey 1.2 light-years from Earth
26% of my acceleration phase completely
My speed is 8,000 miles per second
My fuel usage 19% see I
Jettison my spent fuel cells
I am or course for rival ed Minerva in 31 years time
His life await me
When I was about 10 years old I had one of these department store telescopes learned how to use it
Took it out one night and focused it on what I was told was the planet Saturn
And
When I lined up the viewfinder and held it still and I could see Saturn and its rings
At that moment. I felt a calling and that calling was to learn about how to get there
T-minus 10 9 8 7 6
Liz Johnson answered that calling
becoming a world leading expert in advanced concepts
At NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
In 1999 he led pioneering research into interstellar propulsion
Nature is kind to us in the regard to what options we're going to have to get to the stars
Nature has said you use smart people. You can figure this out. It's just gonna be really hard
It was difficult enough to go to the moon
We're sending probes to the different planets in the solar system, but to take that leap to go to the stars
The distance is just so much further and requires so much more energy that it's just gonna take some time
The goal of engineering missions to the Stars confronts explorers with distances they've never even
contemplated before
One light here is five point eight trillion miles
Which makes our nearest star over 24 trillion miles away?
That's more than a billion round-the-world flights
According to the masters of solar system exploration
The greatest challenge is how to propel a spacecraft fast enough to travel light-years within a lifetime
In order to get humans to make the enormous effort
required to fly that kind of mission
You need to have the period of time between when you launch and when you actually get information back
Be no longer than a typical human lifespan
Humanity has never launched
Multi-generational voyages of exploration it simply never been done
The distances are just daunting and so
They're gonna have the major major breakthrough closely a propulsion
The chemical fuel Rockets like Saturn fire have been the workhorses of solar system exploration
They got us to the moon in just three days
But to reach a planet orbiting our nearest star within a generation
We'd need to travel at a speed that covers the earth to moon distance in just eight seconds
That's 17% the speed of light
Chemical rockets are great for getting out of the gravity will
You have the the high thrust overcome Earth's gravity
But they're terribly inefficient and in order to get to the stars in a reasonable amount of time
You're going to need to get up to some pretty high speeds
And it's not just the thrust
Its how efficiently you do that? Because if you're inefficient you have to have a lot more fuel and get to a point
Where you can't carry enough fuel to move your own weight
The capability of any propulsion system is governed by the rocket equation a trade-off between thrust
efficiency and weight
The most powerful chemical rocket in operation Falcon heavy
First launched in 2018 weighed over three million pounds at takeoff and
95% of it was fuel
It burned through all that fuel in just ten minutes
In order to create enough thrust to deliver, its unusual payload beyond Earth's gravity
Wherever Starman is going it is Tesla it isn't the stars
Only one chemical powered spacecraft has ever made the leap beyond our solar system
in 2013
36 years after its launch Voyager
1 entered interstellar space at 10.5 miles per second
fast enough to travel New York to LA in under five minutes
But at less than
0.0001 percent the speed of light
Still painfully slow if you're aiming for the stars
there well beyond what's considered to be the physical boundary of the solar system and
it's taken over 30-some years to get there at that speed they'll take
70,000 years just to get to the nearest star. No chemical Rockets aren't going to do it
As the push for interstellar exploration gathers pace
The workhorses of the old space race are put out to pasture
Monuments to a bygone era
But if not chemical rockets
What will deliver the seemingly impossible thrust and fuel efficiency required?
To journey to the stars within a lifetime
Three potential propulsion solutions are being explored today
Fusion antimatter and plasma
Imagine we want to go to Proxima Centauri the closest star to our solar system at
4.3 light years away and imagine we want to get there in a few decades
If we use a conventional rocket, we can show that the amount of fuel we need is greater than the mass of the known universe
On the other hand if we use a plasma thruster, we would only need tens or hundreds of kilograms of fuel
So then the mission becomes possible
Physicist Stefan Mizzou is working at the cutting edge of electric propulsion
The whole plasma thruster
We start with a fuel in gas form we will Electrify it
And these electric particles called ions will be ejected at very very very high speed
It's the ejection of his material that will advance the spacecraft
Since the 1970s plasma thrusters have been used in satellites to make positioning adjustments while in orbit
Their principal advantage is efficiency
Demanding just a tiny fraction of the mass of fuel required by chemical rockets
Take the example of Voyager 1 which is currently traveling at 60 1,000 kilometers per hour
with a conventional chemical rocket engine you can reach the speed in a few days but consuming 92 tons of fuel a
Plasma thruster used today on satellites would take two years to achieve the speed but consuming only a few kilograms of fuel
So if you put in a lot more fuel you
can use the thruster for a lot longer and ultimately achieve a speed much higher than Voyager 1 or
Even reach a fraction of the speed of light
Plasma engines offer. Hope of achieving the speed required to reach the Stars
Still holding them back is how long it would take to achieve that speed
Dragging the total trip time into thousands of years
But in the shimmering upper atmosphere of our own planet
Lies the potential for a kind of propulsion until now only dreamt of in the realm of science fiction
I am the navigator
My mind is full of stars and
every planet and
Every moon
Every celestial body that is known I know also
But the dangers my creators did not know of I must discover for myself
An asteroid field
I turn to face it head-on
My titanium shield absorbs the impacts
But one stray penetrates my mind
Emergency backup command system activates. I am reborn
Gage I journeyed on
In 1995 at the CERN particle collider in Switzerland for the first time in human history
Scientists succeeded in producing the most efficient source of energy achievable within the laws of physics
As any good Star Trek family though right on the enterprise and that's what powered their warp drive
Where's warp drive a science-fiction drive, but if you if you think about antimatter it's real
Just like normal matter is protons electrons
there are anti protons and
anti-electron
When matter and antimatter come in contact with in each other
they annihilate and it essentially is the perfect equal MC squared moment as released as energy and
Therefore, it's the most efficient battery we can ever build the most efficient battery that nature will allow us to have
Antimatter is created naturally in space and cosmic rays collide with atoms in the Earth's atmosphere
Producing it at the CERN was a phenomenal scientific and engineering breakthrough
That required accelerating particles to the speed of light
and smashing together
The challenge now is how to create enough of it to propel a spacecraft
This is where it gets tough if you look at the total amount of antimatter produced globally today, it's on the order of nano grams
you would need on the order of
kilograms
Perhaps up to a ton of antimatter to drive a starship
That's not something I want to do on the earth
Because the amount of energy released if that ton of antimatter met a ton of matter
Would be catastrophic and so you're going to have to build the ability to get to make your antimatter in space
Far away from the earth and and use that for your starship construction. So again, it's not practical today, but it's not impossible
The stars themselves suggest another possible solution to the propulsion problem
The energy released from hydrogen atoms fuse together is what lights the sky across the universe
Since the 1950s scientists have been developing fusion reactors to harness it
The Sun does it by brute force?
Has all that mass
Squeezes all that hydrogen together to form helium releases energy and that's how the Sun shines
It's the holy grail of energy production
Tame the power of the Sun and furnish humanity with an infinite supply of energy
But to get fusion going on earth. You need to generate the heat of the Sun
Upwards of 180 million degrees Fahrenheit. Well, we've we've achieved fusion on the ground. It's been done
Fusion happens when a hydrogen bomb is detonated which is not what we want
In the hydrogen bombs of the mid 20th century
The atomic explosion of a radioactive isotope was used to produce the heat required to achieve fusion
But that explosion of energy was not contained in a way that it could be harnessed
What you want to do is be able to capture the energy source of the Sun in
Order to heat your propellant or to use as propellant to get your spacecraft going fast enough to go to the Stars
Modern reactors achieve fusion by other means
by heating plasma
The problem with this approach so far
Is that the energy required to reach that heat has been greater than the energy produced by fusion?
No reactor on earth yet has even reached breakeven
But at Princeton satellite systems a team of engineers is on a mission to solve that problem and
To build a fusion reactor that can take us to the stars
My brother will tell the story that I'm the only person he knows
That's actually doing what they thought they wanted to do in high school. I
Identified aerospace engineering I think colleges for aerospace engineering
I've been doing aerospace engineering ever since because it's really fun and challenging. This space is cool
The exhaust velocity that we have
Is only about a hundred kilometers per second when you you can't get there fast unless you got some meaningful thrust
Aerospace engineer Stephanie Thomas this principal investigator in a NASA funded program to build the world's first
direct fusion drive
an
integrated reactor and propulsion system in one
They want to reach a neighboring star in the neighborhood of five light-years distance. We want to bring 10,000 kilograms of payload
That's 10 metric tons. And we need to do it with an exhaust velocity that we can actually achieve with an engine
Thomas's first challenge is to achieve a constant flow of plasma to catalyze the reactor
We're getting pulses so a pulsing current through these antennae
So every time we're running a five millisecond pulse we heat the plasma we generate current you see a flash
But the reactor would be steady-state so instead of flashing like this it would be bright all the time so that's the goal
Rather than using a heavy and hazardous fuel like uranium
the direct fusion drive runs on a naturally occurring isotope of hydrogen
Deuterium found all over the earth in water
The drive unit is compact
At just three feet diameter and eleven yards long is small enough to mount on a spacecraft
We think that we can build the next generation machine in maybe five years
It will take at least another five years to build a prototype that you could launch but definitely 15 years at the outside
We think we could have one and put it in space
At some point we have to visit the stars
We're never gonna just sit here and be content, you know, even when we're visiting the planets because we want to know what's out there
Everybody wants to go to the stars someday
In the timeline of propulsion technology that someday is getting closer
The next challenge in our bid for the stars
is navigation
I discard my primary engine 15 years out from my destination
At 32,000 miles per second. My acceleration phase is now complete
I deploy anterior thrusters and engage reverse propulsion
I said deceleration at minus 104 miles per second squared
Total ship weight now 46,000 tonnes and decreasing
170 pounds per second of propellant burns
I refine my trajectory and set course for Minerva
In the realm of space exploration
The solar system is our neighborhood
Since visiting the moon in 69 we've dropped in on almost every body around the Sun
In 2015 the New Horizons probe completed the first flyby of our most distant neighbor
Pluto
He took over nine years to get there, but at every step of the way
The unmanned spacecraft was guided remotely from Earth
The way we navigate today when we send these probes out
even the one that went to Pluto is we have a
Combination of data taken by the flying spacecraft and our big computers here on the earth and a processing
radio information that comes from a spacecraft
when we went by Pluto
We were basically so accurate that we were hitting a golf ball into a hole from Los Angeles to London
That's how accurate that was done
Sending directions to probes works for solar system exploration
But as we set our sights on the Stars, the distances are so enormous a new question emerges
How to navigate a journey of
Light-years if we were ever to go explore a planet around another star
The distance would be so great that the machine would have to essentially operate on its own we call that autonomy
We're taking big steps in that direction with curiosity. We did a lot
Landed on Mars in 2012
Curiosity was the first spacecraft equipped with an autonomous navigation system
Given coordinates by Mission Control the rover could image its surroundings and
compute a safe path across the Martian landscape
But for an interstellar mission there will be no relay instructions
all the navigation would have to be onboard all the algorithms the
Computations of the orbit the computations of the maneuvers to get to the right place. What stars to look at is for this year
What stars to look at for next year?
What we would have to do is extend our minds to imagine all the possibilities that they might run into and we would spend
Literally years building this hierarchy of possibilities into this artificial intelligent machine
It would have to know at all times
how well Holland's critical systems were doing and how to fix them if they weren't working, right and
how to replace them if they couldn't be fixed what a challenge
I
Enter the Minerva star system forty nine point six years since my departure
I reopened my transceiver and prepare to send the message home
Have arrived
With any mission
Communication is paramount
Most spacecraft do not return
Instead they send their data back to earth
When great distances in the speed of light
Get involved. It becomes a very very different sort of experience simple words like now
take on a kind of a different meaning I
Remember when we were landing on Mars from when you hit the top of the Martian atmosphere to when you're on the surface takes about?
six minutes
At that time the one what we call the one-way light time how long it takes a signal to travel at the speed of light
From Mars to earth was ten minutes. All systems are go we are currently committed
Away from hitting the top of party Mountaineer
so we're sitting there in the control room and we're watching the radio signal and we're watching the
Spacecraft begins to slow down and curve down in the Martian atmosphere. It's just at the top of the atmosphere
The reality is out at Mars. It's been on the surface for four minutes. I
mean of
193 miles per hour weird and it may be a happy healthy Rover or maybe a smoking hole in the ground, and I don't know
But I'm watching this and I'm not seeing
reality at that moment and
Magnify that so instead of 10 minutes is 10 years
Communication with every craft currently in space is conducted via the giant dishes of the deep space network
Each powerful enough to track a signal from Pluto. They're stronger than a CB radio
All of our deep space communications are run through the deep space network, that's an array of very large satellite dishes
They're set up at three locations around the world
One is in California at Goldstone. One is in Australia Canberra and one is in Spain at Madrid
we need a
Very large dish area in order to collect all the energy and be able to communicate all the way out at places like Pluto
where our spacecraft are going
In 2014 Mathew Abramson was mission manager of a radical new form of communication
Installed on the International Space Station
designed to overcome the limitation of
traditional radio transmission
The limitation is primarily that the distance that were sending the transmission over
we send out that signal it spreads out over time and over space and so
As AI spreads out. It dilutes the signal power
the further out you go the lower and lower your data rate is or gets out to the level of something like your
dial-up modems that we used to have many years ago
When the New Horizons probes sent back pictures from Pluto via radio transmission
The signal was so weak it took 15 months to downlink the images
from a 12-hour flyby
But with the technology Abramson launched and tested in 2014
That download time could be reduced to just one day
By sending data back to earth on beams of light
The idea is you take a focused laser beam and send the signal same signal over that beam
But it's much more efficient because you have this focused signal that's not spreading out as much over time
Laser wavelengths are packed much more densely than sound waves. So
They transmit more information per second and with a stronger signal
The greater bandwidth allows spacecraft to downlink multiple large packets of data
simultaneously and in record time
The reason for that is this we go further out into the universe and we go to a place like Mars and Jupiter
Currently today, we're just getting back single images of the science and in the future
If you do have a high bandwidth system like an optical system
You could get back high-definition video and I think getting high-definition video back would be a game-changer for space exploration
I fly by the gas giants exoplanet Miniver. See I
Use its atmosphere to create drag and pull me in towards my target
I trace an elliptical trajectory around the Minerva son
And emerge to take my first glimpse of my new hog
I decoupled from my antenna
My Explorer module holds my mind
I commence entry landing and descent sequence
Enter orbit, so close now
I deploy my satellites to map the surface
And scalped potential landing sites
Is this new world ready to be known
The part of this that is thrilling to me is
that our
best
attributes if done correctly
Exploration at its finest
Have been programmed into an extension of our species it belongs to no single individual
it is more than anything else a
symbol of
Humanity working together to create something whose only purpose is to gather knowledge
what a
beautiful thought
And after a long period of time
Finally the moment of truth is coming
and
More than likely the people that designed it originally are no longer alive
Welcome to the ops lab francesca
And they have passed on this thrill this passion to their children and perhaps even to their grandchildren
Okay, we're gonna walk around on Mars Francesca
Will it be that they found life
Will it be that they found a planet where we could someday exist?
Whatever it is, it will be a historical milestone unlike any other
That
Moment when something new is revealed that no one's ever seen before
That's just glorious. That's exploration
And it's gonna happen when we go to other worlds around other stars in a very very very big way
we'll be sitting back on earth and that downlink will come and
The video or the pictures or the spectra or whatever it is. They're gonna come up on a screen. Everybody's jaws are just gonna drop
This could be the end
I really caPSURE into the unknown
If I touch down
If I am welcome if I find life
This could be the beginning
And I am ready to touchdown I
Am ready to explore
And ready to discover life
Four and a half billion years ago in the nursery of the heavens the star was born
a giant cloud of dust and gas
distended and ballooned
Until under the burden of its gravity it collapsed upon itself
swirled into a disc and
forged a solar system from the dust that
Star was our son
Of the planets that were formed only one that we know of gave rise to life
But could our Sun our solar system our living earth
Have produced the only Genesis
among the stars
My intuition is that the universe is full of life
There's no reason fundamentally it might not look like Earth with vegetation and animals
But the question I'm interested is really the start of life
And on earth we see for a long time life is just microbial with all the essential features of life
were there nothing new was invented when life became trees and animals it was just
Morphological that's just window dressing
To me it's actually not very interesting at all
everything interesting with respect to biology was present when there were no trees and no animals and life was just
Microscopic the DNA was there. The amino acids was there all the biochemical machinery that makes life life was there
Life is a miracle and an enigma
Even to those who spent their own lives trying to crack the code
NASA planetary scientist Chris. McKay is one of them
Part of a generation of scientists on a quest to find a second genesis
beyond earth
The search for life began with a lot of optimism focused on Mars
Here was a planet that could have had a thick atmosphere
Could have had water in the recent past and in the popular literature at least still had water so the search for life on Mars
really was
Fought to be easy
in
1976 NASA's Viking mission made the first ever landing on the Martian surface
Looking for the life that had been hoped for well
Turned out a lot harder nature was guarding her secrets much more closely than we imagined
So then things basically went quiet in the search for life, and I think they were sparked again. Not on Mars
But in the outer solar system
Three two one
Liftoff of the Cassini spacecraft on a Trek to Saturn
In the final decades of the 20th century
humanity launched a series of ambitious missions
To explore the outer solar system standing by for solid rocket boosters all systems go at this time
The discovery of liquid water on the moons of Jupiter and Saturn and
The misty plumes of Enceladus and the subterranean oceans of Europa and Ganymede has
Opened a thrilling new chapter in the search for a second Genesis
The impact of identifying a separate origin of life on one of these worlds
Would extend far beyond our solar system?
Finding life that's distinctly different that truly represents the second genesis of life
Well, that would tell us that the answer is not one
It's two in terms of life in the universe and going from one to two is huge
Because on the scale of the universe the only numbers that make sense are 0 1 and infinity
And what we learn in our solar system will then guide how we search for life beyond
The renewed optimism in the search for life within our solar system emerged alongside a discovery that
Transformed the way we see the universe
In the early 2000s nasa's kepler telescope
reveal that every star in the galaxy just like our Sun is
orbited by at least one planet
And up to a quarter of these so-called exoplanets are believed to be suitable for life
In the Milky Way alone
That means roughly 400 billion solar systems and 80 billion potentially habitable worlds
The odds of finding a second Genesis have never been better
The way I like to think of this is that life will arise anywhere where the conditions are
Right and the trick in that is what constitutes the right conditions?
Planetary scientist Jonathan, Lennon is another veteran in the hunt of a life beyond Earth
But what exactly is life and how does one search for it
The basic essentials for life to begin and to exist are liquid water
Organic molecules because carbon is really the essential
Versatile element that can combine with other elements in many different ways to make the structures of life
free energy and
Minerals and nitrogen to provide the other elements that are required to keep the chemistry going
to generate
Catalysts that generate more catalysts and more structures until we get to the complexity of a primitive cell
Liquid water carbon molecules energy minerals
And the secret formula that animates it all into a living cell
These ingredients this recipe for life
Is what our scientists are hunting for or other worlds
I
Deploy my spider BOTS on to the main event surface
I've 3d print a fleet of drones and I let them fly
With these eyes and these instruments I would taste and touch
This new world for the first time
Will I find all that is hopeful
Exoplanets of a new frontier in the search for life beyond Earth
but the prospect of exploring distant worlds presents an expanding universe of rivers to cross and
mountains to climb
How on earth can we prepare to explore planets we know so little about
Exoplanets presents a real challenge because there's so much uncertainty
So knowing whether or not you're going to find a cliff face versus a desert versus an ocean versus an ice tundra
We may not know when we launched
So you've got to design your system to survive and operate in all of those possible conditions
At NASA's robotics headquarters in Pasadena, California
Around 100 young engineers are busy reinventing the wheels of the Rovers evolved
With planetary exploration we started with a large robot
That was very stable very safe. And now we're beginning to take more risk. We're trying to get to new places
Trying to shrink down the size of the platform do more with less
It's a pretty perfect ledge over there. Yeah, sort of thing other Rovers can't fit into
Some of our robots are designed to climb up different surfaces
So we have a claw
inspired robot that uses sharp hooks to grab on to the
Rough surface kind of like an insect or a rock climber would scale up a cliff
We also use electrostatics to stick to surfaces
So this is like rubbing the balloon on your head and it sticks to the wall
One of the key innovations in the new breed of Robotics is biomimicry
using biological systems processes as the model for design
To look for life behave like life
We have created a material that has mechanical properties similar to that
You see in biological tissues we have already with this system developed swimming robots
There is a lot of work today in robots that can go between dry surfaces and water like surfaces
Wherever we find water on earth we find life. So we have a strategy that we've used on Mars called follow the water
I think we're going to use that same strategy when we visit an exoplanet
I follow the Louvre you of a retreating glacier
My hygrometers detect increasing humidity
I am on the scent of fresh water
Tracing its inevitable course
It's branching channels over wide floodplains
Consuming rock and mineral
Now growing brackish perhaps estuary
Fresh water and sediments meeting the insistent flow of an incoming tide
There is a river ocean system or may never be
An ideal breeding ground for life
This is a place where there's life but stout life is we're familiar with
Here life is painted living and saturated soft. It's not the kind of green things. We normally think of his life
The salt palms of San Francisco Bay are naturally occurring wetland
reshaped by human industry and
colonized by trillions of colored micro organisms
These are type of hail philic archaea, it's a particularly unusual type of microorganism
It's extrema file
it requires high salt and it lives in an environment where only it can survive so it
Dominates so where it grows it grows well and and it's the king
What these salty bugs have in common with everything from oak trees to humans is access to liquid water
All life on Earth in some sense is fragile, it's all tied to the availability in the chemistry of water
We tend to think while life on earth has expanded to all the corners of the earth and it is really it's everywhere
That's because water is everywhere in this planet. This is a water planet
When we look beyond the earth we realized that water is in fact rare
The liquid state of water is rare and life is not the all-conquering
Capability a life is only can squeeze itself into those environments where there's liquid water
Waters interesting in that if we look at carbon, which is the next part of the recipe for life
where water is liquid carbon can be a solid a dissolved ion or a gas all
coexisting in the same place
Carbon is an unusual element in that it is capable of making
Many many different kinds of molecules. There are literally millions of organic molecules now
And water then becomes the milieu in which all of the chemistry of carbon that leads to us is going to take place
Carbon-based organic molecules, like amino acids are the building blocks of life
Combining in liquid water to form the structures of every living cell
On earth today these complex molecules are everywhere but where did they come from?
On earth the problem we have in the scenario of the origin of life
Is that when the earth formed around 4.5 billion years ago, it had a turbulent period in its infancy
With very intense meteor bombardment. It has an awesome
It was an extremely hot environment which is not conducive to the emergence of complex organic molecules
One of the ideas that emerged around this is could some of this organic matter have come from space
In March 2004 the European Space Agency launched the Rosetta spacecraft
on a hunt for the building blocks of life beyond Earth
its destination was
250 million miles away and Counting the moving target hurtling through space at
37,000 miles per hour a
lump of ice and dust the size of Mount Fuji the
Comet 67p
Rosetta's mission was to land on it and find out that it's made of
From 2011 onwards Nikola Altobelli was Rosetta project scientist
We think that comets when they were formed remain somewhat frozen in a state that has not changed for billions of years
So the idea is maybe they've incorporated the organic material that was already present in the molecular cloud
from which the solar system evolved resistance
Because comets formed in the icy outer regions they hold a frozen record of the solar system's birth
And as the young earth cooled and oceans formed around four billion years ago
some of those same comments
Came crashing down to earth
So, could it have been comments
Bearing the carbon-based organic molecules from our solar system's birth that seeded life on earth
It was the task of Rosetta's landing module fillet to find out
The landing was a time of very strong emotions and it took place over a full day
It was the 12th of November 2014
In the morning there was confirmation of the separation
The first image arrived taken by the lander when it was separating from Rosetta
Then there were seven hours of waiting
Around 4:00 p.m. Came the confirmation of touchdown
But the follow up signals suggested something wasn't right
The first panoramic images that were taken of the surface showed an orientation of the lander which was not as it should have been
And as the hours passed we realized that the anchor had failed
Filet had bounced back into space
Then bounced a second time before finally coming to rest several hundred meters away. I
Remember someone saying filet dances a little Samba but we perform most of the scientific experiments that were planned
One could even say because it bounced in several places it allowed us to obtain data from different areas of the comet
And the orbiter perfectly fulfilled its mission
The results were remarkable
Fillet detected 16 organic molecules in
Just a tiny sample of dust kicked up by the initial touchdown
Among them some of the key building blocks of life on earth
50 percent by mass of the dust particles ejected by the comet is organic a carbon-based material
This organic material came from the molecular cloud from which the solar system was formed
And thus may have seated earth with all this organic material
The organic molecules necessary for the emergence of life on Earth were already present in space
Rosetta demonstrated that the building blocks of life on earth were created during the birth of our solar system
But what about beyond
Could these same vital ingredients be part of the birth of all stars?
Looking back at our own earth and why we have this which you know biosphere
Well, I think it all started with having all this organic material that we are made up of but that was delivered from space
from comets and from asteroids
So we were thinking about the likelihood of life elsewhere. We're pretty much thinking about the likelihood of having that same scenario taking place
In 2015
Hi, honey, arid mountains of the Atacama Desert
Professor Karen Oberg set out on a hunt for the building blocks of life
In the birth cloud of an alien star system for the help of a new telescope called Alma
Alma
Consists of 66 individual telescopes that's all working together
it operates at millimetre wavelengths and
Millimeter wavelengths is where we can detect molecules tell these organic molecules that we are so interested in
Obert turned Alma's gaze towards the Taurus system and found the young star
MWC 480 in the throes of labor
Girdled by a disc of gas and dust from which planets were being born
We see this dust and gas surrounding these dis young stars and
What's even more exciting we see that they often have little lanes or tracks in them where it looks like?
Confirmation is going on right now
After months of collecting and analyzing the data
Oberg announced a discovery that
bluesy odds wide open of finding a second Genesis on other worlds
In the disk of this alien solar system
Alma had detected some of the same organic molecules that helped give rise to life on Earth
We found three kinds of cyanides three molecules and the same chemical family and
Those three kinds of molecules have also been found in our own solar system in comets
The same organic molecules
with the same molecular
Spacial to create life are out there among the stars
Chemistry is awesome is the reason that we are alive and that we're here in the first place
So far is only, you know one system apart from our solar system where we have this chemical information
But my intuition would be that it's going to be very common. This kind of chemistry is gonna be
almost universal
I scan for sites or geochemical activity
I find a hydrothermal field of fuel's and hot springs
On earth such conditions are rich in carbon chemistry and minerals
I find another mineral-rich water source upstream
I identify complex molecular structure in solution
I extract a sample for analysis
And return it to the lander module
Could this be evidence of life?
Let's get the samples yet ya
Can take another measurement
The laws of chemistry and physics are universal so
It's a given that when we go to another earth-like planet with water
with the sorts of minerals that we have here in the iron core and
atmosphere is
Inevitable that this kind of simple chemistry would have been present
Okay, it's 15 degrees up here, let's see what this little guy has for us
As long as there's a chance for energy to interact with that mixture things will happen Wow, look at that
One degree. Keep going up the
Question that we are heading for right now how certain can we be that that mix of simple chemistry?
Could take the next step in complexity so life could begin
In the hydrothermal fields of thumpers Hill California, all the ingredients of life are brought together
water carbon molecules energy minerals
Biologists David Deamer and Bruce Damer believe
This is the kind of environment where life could get started on another world
Bubbling pools
strange colored rocks
water of different PHS
All kinds of flows and dynamics steam rising. It. Looks like nature's chemistry set and
It's an engine an actual engine for the beginning of a living system
Conditions like this define the early Earth
Evidence of similar environments has been found on Mars and
Researchers expect hydrothermal fields to be a common feature of earth-like exoplanets
But how might nature's chemistry set cook up the recipe of life
Everything that's alive is in fact based on polymers. Everybody knows the name DNA nucleic acid
That's one of the polymers proteins. These are
Amino acid polymers and that's basically the start of all life. Are those two polymers?
So what we're doing is taking small molecules the pieces of a polymer called monomers in fact
And we're exposing them to energy such as you see here at bumpass. Hell and
Seeing where that energy is sufficient to make those monomers link up one after another after another
To make a polymer and in fact if we can make big protein like molecule
And a nucleic acid like molecule and put it into a little wrapper a compartment
We were on the way we call those protocells
Each sample contains organic molecules or monomers
Exposed to the mineral-rich steam and heat energy of the fumarole in an attempt to form a protocell
We think that drying out such as you see all around us here at la pucelle water
Coming in then drying out coming in drying out. That's a cycle
We think that that cycle is very important to drive the process by which polymers are
synthesized and then
accumulate
Let's go for it
Failure you sure yes
The first experiment fails just as it would do many times on an earthlike exoplanet
But if all the elements were present in conditions such as this this experiment in life would repeat again and again
But some of them got a lot of liquid in one last try
given enough time and keep in mind we have an entire planet with
Lots of volcanic land masses coming up with lots of puddles like this trying to learn how to become a life
Mostly its failures, but it would only take a few successful
Protocells that happen to be able to survive and had learned how to make more of themselves
So go ahead and get them into the boxes
Is the universe made to make life
This is a huge question that sort of beyond the scope of perhaps humans to be able to answer
But what we can observe is everything comes down to cycling it comes to rhythms and
overlapping rhythms and patterns
And it's almost as though if you get the right cycling and patterning in a system
It learns how to do that itself and how to lift itself into being
And so perhaps that's the closest metaphor that we know
That the geology gave us that ability the moon going around the earth gave us tides
The rotation of the earth gives us days and nights
Rainfall into these hydrothermal fields gives us geysers that are periodic and life still follows rhythmic patterns
That's the clue we have so perhaps it's the universal harmonic that creates life
Most of us tend to think of things are either alive or dead
But the transition from not alive the inanimate states the animate state
Is that transition only possible as a single step or is it possible as a series of steps?
If it's possible as a series of steps then the intermediate States would be partially alive
Now you might say well come on
It's either alive or it's not and I would say well
The live means it's got sounds the cells are replicating. The cells are doing this that and the other
You need all of that to be fully alive
But the chance of getting that all in one go seems a little bit remote so maybe we got one of the attributes
On and then it acquires another attribute and another and eventually it reaches the point where it is fully alive
Professor John Sutherland is trying to retrace the steps in the origins of life
in search of the processes that animate a cell into being
Of course
The cell is more than just the chemicals that comprise it
Because her cell has just died is still the chemicals that are there. So there's something that energizes it that coordinates it and
We don't know how to get that but that's fast goal
So what we're doing here is putting the sample into an apparatus in which it will be irradiated by ultraviolet light
In a series of experiments that simulated the conditions of a young rocky planet
Sutherland successfully achieved stage 1 in producing the basic components of a cell
lipids proteins
sugars and
nucleic acids
What we found is that you can make all of the components for life under slightly different conditions
When you first see it happen, it's like magic but it isn't magic it it's not as hard to make as we originally thought
All the hardware of a cell can be created from a single base molecule that's widespread among the stars
But what about the next step
How is that hardware organized and energized into life?
If the conditions are the same elsewhere what are the chance that you can give them building blocks to life
The chemistry of cells is unique and self-organized
So one part of chemistry is actually controlling another and yet somehow that's controlling the first one
Chemists are used to controlling the chemistry themselves and the idea of letting things run and go off of their own accord
Is something that goes slightly against your chemical education? How can chemistry take place if you like with the experiment - just
Setting the system up and then letting it go over zone record
Life is information that can reproduce itself
Not hardware. It's genetic information. That's the key to life is the information and the DNA and the ability of the DNA to
express that information in proteins and
propagate the information that way
DNA is the blueprint for all of life on earth an
instruction book for how to make and maintain all living organisms
Encoded in the twin coiling lines of a double helix is the genetic information
That tells life to build a rose or a leopard or a blue whale
If we find DNA on other worlds, there's no doubt that there's been life there the
Characteristic molecules of life makes genetic molecules that contain information like DNA these molecules do not arise
Non-biologically, they have to be built the surest as if we find a skyscraper on Mars
We know that it was built and it's not just a random assemblage of rocks
That's how we'll find evidence of life
My lander module prepares to uplink the sample data from the hydrothermal field
My optical communication transmitted via hybrid silicon laser at 12 gigabits per second
I received the signal and ingest the data for analysis
Organic polymeric triple helix structure
Some consistency with terrestrial forms and
Yet
unlike anything I've seen before a
bio molecule of alien life
We've come to a place deep in the outback of Australia
Looking for what we think is evidence for the oldest life on earth
Astrobiologist martin van cran donk is travelling back in time
To the dawn of life on earth of the three and a half billion years ago
Conveniently recorded in the ancient rocks of australia's remote northwest
At this time in early Earth there was a very different planet to what we have today
We would have had some shallow seas but those seas would have been green because they were rich in iron
And if we looked up at the sky the sky wouldn't have been the beautiful blue that we see behind us here on
Early Earth without oxygen the sky would have been orange
we receive black continents of fresh basaltic lava that
Would have been very active so there have been faults and earthquakes there would have been bubbling geysers that were going off
It was actually a very alien
Yet this alien earth was already inhabited
Colonizing the shores of the crater lakes and the Seas that wash the ancient Pilbara landmass
Was a living skin of slime
But the bacterial communities that left the clearest fossil calling card built up their homes
in high-rise mounds
so the really wonderful thing about this outcrop is that you can look down and see the seafloor so long ago and
Really you get this incredible view of the gentle undulations of the water moving across the surface
But then popping up through our these domes and cone shapes all irregular different sizes different shapes
These distinctive bumps of a fossilized dwellings of the oldest living organisms on earth
It was here over three and a half billion years ago that stromatolites
First raised their heads above the water of an ancient Shaw
They can start to get a feel for life grabbing a foothold in
the geological record
And so this currently still is the oldest evidence for life on Earth. It's our
Great-great-great great-great, great-great, grandmother's and grandfathers. That's really the the precursor to everything that came later
All the green bushes and the trees it all started here
The prehistoric
Organisms that built stromatolites was so successful. They ruled the earth for up to 3 billion years
Life finds a way
And somehow these crafty architects found a way to organize water
carbon molecules minerals and energy into a living cell
Is this what we should be looking for on alien worlds
My drone survey the dried-up basin of an inland sea
But what's this
a lone survivor on the airplane
Zero fight succulents ten
FICO Berlin like pigment to absorb the red twelve son
a hybrid of terrestrial and aquatic species
Around 500 million years ago long since stromatolite s-- first took root in the shallows
Earth's oceans bloomed with animal life
It was a very different world to the one that had made way for microbes
With air to breathe now and a protective atmosphere under a gentler Sun
We think microbial life is gonna be very common that the conditions to produce microbial life
Happen over and over and over and many many different planets
But that animal life is only gonna be able to evolve and then stick around for any length of time
When you have really stable conditions
Professor Peter Ward is one of the originators of the rare earth hypothesis
The theory that the long term habitability of Earth for animal life may be rare in the galaxy
Habitability is really the ability of a planet to have conditions that can allow life first to originate but secondly to stay alive
Habitable worlds can be just a short instant in time and then it changes and it gets nasty
So what to us made earth rare is the long-term habitability the planet
The fact that it has remained constant and temperature
With the oxygen values we have
That we don't have these extremes in climate that we've got this
Constancy, that's the rarity of it
My drones detect a disturbance in the electromagnetic field a
Network of forged metallic structures
Bearing the mark of Industry
This is not a glance
This is not animal
but this is
evidence of life
I
Am the mind of the mothership alone among the stars
50 years ago from a planet far away the planets you call home. I launched a
Journey of 28 trillion miles
across the yawning time of space to the exoplanets Minerva be
A small rocky planet much like Earth, but orbiting another Sun
Here I have found water
Organic molecules and micro organisms. I
Have found life
When the news of my discovery reaches earth years from now some of you would be amazed
But others who remain unsatisfied
And you will ask have I not found animals or birds?
Have I not met?
intelligent life like us and
So my search continues
The great Marvel and the paradox of wide open spaces is that they make us look inwards
Confronted with the infinite we reflect upon the self
Where do we come from?
Why are we here?
Are we alone?
As a young child I was mostly interested in philosophy and I used to wander
Into the hills of the village where I was born. I was interested in
questions about our existence
involving also the big
Picture which is us being in the universe the question is how did we come to be?
inhabiting this
Two-dimensional surface on a piece of rock that we call our home the earth
Near a star like the Sun that is one of tens of billions of stars in the Milky Way galaxy
That is one of trillions of galaxies in the universe
how did this all come about and
Are we alone in particular?
Professor avi love grew up, but he never grew out of his obsession with the fundamental mysteries of life
Today as chair of astronomy at Harvard University lobe is part of a generation of elite scientists
Riding a revolution in the quest to understand our place in the universe
We are living at a very special time
Over the past two decades thousands of planets were discovered
Around other stars, and we realized that our solar system is not rare
There are planets around almost every star and moreover about a quarter of all stars
have an earth-mass planet
Orbiting just the right distance for liquid water to exist on its surface and for the chemistry of life to develop
The odds of finding life among the stars have never been better
Following the detection in 2016 of organic molecules on the moons of Saturn on the comet 67p
And in the disk of an emerging star system
Scientists now believe that the building blocks for simple life are common throughout the universe in my view
it is very likely that the life primitive life exists on many other planets the
question of whether intelligent life exists is more difficult to answer because
We don't fully understand what led to our existence and moreover intelligent life existed on earth
Just relatively recently in cosmological terms
But I'm agnostic about whether the answer is yes or no. I think we should explore rather than have a prejudice
just like
Columbus went out to discover the new worlds the answer lies in space
I am in a stable orbit around the eggs or planets Miniver be
My solar panels are configured to harness the full spectrum of its muted red
dwarf Sun I
Keep a watchful eye over my swarm of Explorer robots below I
Scan the radio and optical wavelengths hoping for a whisper of alien technology
But Minerva bee is silent
What would it take to calculate the odds of finding intelligent life among the stars
In the early 1960s one audacious astronomer Frank Drake
Devised an equation to answer that question
the Drake Equation essentially is a statement of our ignorance about
Life in the universe in the first meeting held in the United States about the search for extraterrestrial intelligence
Frank Drake and a number of other researchers got together and Drake needed a way to organize how the
Discussion at the meeting would go when you sat down and fucked like well, what do I need?
to know in order to know how many intelligent civilizations there might be out there in the galaxy for us to communicate with
Drake listed seven variables
He believed would need to be worked out in order to determine the number of intelligent civilizations in our galaxy
With six of those seven variables unknown at the time
Drake did not foresee the ready solution, but according to
computational
Astrophysicist Adam Frank, that's all changing
We are in fact going through quite a bit of a revolution in this
this idea in this equation in particular what it comes from is
The the fact that we have man old two of the terms
Right. So in when in 1962 when Drake wrote down this equation only one of the terms was known ah
Stands for the rate of star formation
or the number of Sun mass stars born each year in
1962 Drake put the figure at 10
But it wasn't until 2011 that NASA's Kepler space telescope
Gave us the answers to the second and third variables in Drake's equation
The fraction of stars that have planets and the number of those planets with the right conditions for life to form
it turns out that the fraction of stars with planets is
Approximately 1 every star you see in the sky when you walk out at night and look at a random star in the sky
It has a planet at least one
and then the number of planets in the habitable zone turns out to be you know on the order of
0.2. Okay. So this is like saying, you know
if you look at between four and five stars, one of those is going to have a
It's gonna have a planet in the right place for life to form
Remember that the galaxy contains four hundred billion stars
Just the galaxy alone four hundred billion stars, right? So when you think about all those stars in the galaxy, that's an amazing number
Up to 80 billion exoplanets in our galaxy have the right conditions for life
When you consider that at the time Drake formulated his equation no one knew if there was even one
Exoplanet out there. This truly is a revolution of our understanding
But what about the other unknowns in the Drake Equation
Inspired by Kepler's game-changing discoveries a new generation of scientists has made it their mission to
fill in the blanks
Of all the habitable exoplanets out there how many of them actually host life
This is the next unknown in the Drake Equation and the challenge it presents for scientists is immense
How does one detect life from light-years away
One approach that shows promise is to study the gases around
Exoplanets in search of a so-called bio signature the evidence of life imprinted in the atmosphere. I
Think one of the things that's most exciting for exoplanet atmospheres right now is that we can actually measure
Gases with telescopes from Earth remote sensing is a very powerful technique. It's how we first study into the solar system
Planetary scientist Sarah Horst is a leading investigator of atmospheric chemistry a
Field that took off in a radical new direction in 2001 with the first ever detection of an exoplanets atmosphere
There's a very small number of gases that were pretty sure we've been able to see an exoplanet atmospheres, so water is one of the
gases that people claim that they've detected
Some other things that you don't tend to think of as gases have also been detected things like sodium for example
The main challenge with exoplanets is just that they're very far away. And so you need a bigger telescope
That's telescope is soon to be launched
While atmospheric observations so far have been limited to a narrow range of gases the James Webb Space Telescope
Will be the first instrument capable of sampling a broad spectrum
The challenge now for researchers like Horst is to define a set of bio signatures
gasses that indicate the presence of life for the James Webb to go looking for
One of the gases on on earth that is most, you know
Most significant in terms of the fact that there's life on Earth is oxygen, you know, the oxygen on earth is produced by life
That's why it's here
But oxygen isn't necessarily a bio signature if you saw oxygen around another world
You wouldn't necessarily say. Oh that's life
Europa is main
Atmospheric constituent is o2 and it's not from life. It's from breaking up water. So it's difficult to point to
One gas or even a small set of gases that you would say if I see that I know there's life there
that said solar system exploration tells us that we will always be surprised and so
You know
it's quite possible that there is going to be a planet where we get the data from James Webb and it is going to be
Glaringly obvious from the data that there is life on that planet
Horst's generation may well be the first to put a number on the fraction of habitable exoplanets that hosts life
But the next unknown in the Drake Equation
Could prove much more challenging to resolve
How many of those life-bearing planets go on to develop intelligence?
Even if we
understand that other planets have simple
I fought them and indeed we might be able to make astronomical observations to test that in the next 10 20 years
Then of course, there's another big uncertainty which is how likely it. Is that simple life
Evolves as it did on earth into a marvelous complex biosphere
Containing even creatures like ourselves. We don't know what the chances are of getting from simple life to
Advanced life of the kind. We recognize as intelligence
After 47 days of expiration I have found no trace of extant animal life and
So I searched into the past
I scan the strata of an exposed defamation for fossil evidence
I apply the data to my orbiter for analysis
There's something here
Reptilian
Approximately 1 million years old
to rest your compatibility detected an
armored Commodore like species
Marine compatibility also found a possible transitional species from sea to land
The complex life failed to establish itself on the surface of maneuverable
or is this evidence of
extinction
To solve the next unknown in the Drake Equation
The fraction of worlds where simple life evolves to intelligence
We need to understand the evolutionary pathway to advanced life on earth
Just over 540 million years ago evolution on our planet took a giant leap forward
There's no better place to understand that process than here in the Canadian Rockies
In the rich fossil deposits of the Burgess Shale
For well over a century the fossils hidden in these mountains have helped generations of scientists
retrace the evolutionary pathway to complex life on earth
Professor Robert Gamez and dr. Jean-bernard Curran a leading the excavation of a recently identified
deposit in marble canyon
Battling the icy wind and snow for the prospect of a new discovery
Something to show you here that would collect it the other day. It's a big slab
Wow this fall so here Wow. Yeah, it's quite extraordinary, isn't it? I've never seen anything like it
That's the exciting part of our commercial and or something new coming up
these rocks contains some of the first evidence of
multicellular organisms on our planet
The first eyes
The first hard body parts pose and exoskeletons
The first lateral symmetry the first efficient guts
Even the first brains
Sculpted in the finally packed sediment of an ancient ocean is the turning point in the evolution of advanced life on earth
the Cambrian explosion
Very good have a very nice slap and some Dahlia on it
Wow, that's quite spectacular
So to put things into perspective
Today we know life is widespread. It's all our owners in the oceans in the mountains and so on so forth and
we can trace the root of all these life forms to pretty much the Cambrian period
As far as we know life dates back at least at that three point four billion years ago and it wasn't until about
540 million years ago that we have the Cambrian explosion and that
fundamentally changes the planet it goes from a microbial world to one that is literally teeming with animals and not just
Small and simple animals as we would have originally imagined but instead we have a whole array of complex life
Still only in Earth's oceans at that time, but all of the major groups of animals appear
geologically instantaneously
Among the species found here is one of the ancestral roots on the tree of intelligent life
So one of the most important fossils that we find here in this area is Metis Prague
I know it's hard to pronounce but it's actually very very important fossil for the understanding of all
the vertebrates and
This is an animal that looks like a fish
he has a pair of eyes in the front and the structure which we call a notochord which
part of it will eventually become our spine and
meta Springer doesn't have any evidence of
Structures that could help him to protect itself. So I tend to think that perhaps he was smart
In the fact that we find them clustering which shows evidence of schooling
is very much reminiscent to what we know in modern fish who have
Evolved us such behavior to avoid predation
Predation is a very key factor in in driving the evolution of animals and we see evidence of that here in the burgess shale
As organisms began to develop both a weaponry to capture one another as well as defenses
Eyes closed camouflage armor
All these new tools required coordination by a nervous system the stuff from which the brain is made
So could intelligence be the product of an evolutionary arms race
We certainly see on earth a connection between predation and mobility
Organisms that can just sit in the Sun and soak up the Rays they don't need to move
their food comes to them but organisms that
Prey on vegetation need to be able to move around and organisms that prey on the prayers need to move even faster
They need to be really strong and fast and you could argue that that dynamic of predation and motion
Causes the development of intelligence and maybe somehow it leads the sort of overwhelming intelligence that humans have expressed
Is this the inevitable progression of evolution from simple life via
diversification and predation into intelligence
Or is an event like the Cambrian explosion
So rare that life on other planets might never get the chance to pass first base
I think that wherever we find life in the universe
that life will change through time in a way that's consistent with
What we've learned about evolution on this planet, I think that is a general feature of life
To Professor Andy no
Similar environmental conditions or biomes will give rise to similar
Evolutionary solutions no matter where in the universe that takes place
it's a theory known as
convergence
If you look at a bat for example and a bird they both fly using wings and yet they don't have a common ancestor
That flew and had wings. They have evolved that capacity from separate origins
but to a similar functional hand
In advanced animal life some convergent biological structures are so common as to be almost universal
Well, the eye is a terrific example of
convergence because
And we all understand what the eye. Does that your eyes are this sophisticated?
Sensory apparatus that allows you to engage and engage with the world around you
interestingly if you look at squids and octopus
They have a visual system that is every bit as acute as ours but evolves from a separate source there again
There's no
Common ancestor of squids and mammals that had an eye
Is convergence a magic funnel that guides life on any planet
Inexorably towards intelligence or could there be other more powerful forces at play?
The absence of terrestrial animals Oh Minerva bee could indicate an extinction event
Or that life has not successfully transitioned as it did on earth from sea to land. I
Deploy my submarine exposure module into the Minerva sea
In the shelter of the ocean life should strive
Extensive macroalgae and
peripheral
suggests high water oxygenation and shallow UV penetration
Ideal conditions for advanced life to evolve
a giant trilobite like species
Take mater body plan and dorsal exoskeleton
Comparable with late Cambrian arthropods on earth
Complex mobility and behavior a school swimming information
Perhaps a strategy to avoid predation
strength in numbers or a kind of camouflage
The force variable in the Drake Equation the fraction of life-bearing worlds that evolve intelligence
still eludes
scientists today
On earth the great burst of life during the Cambrian explosion was an integral step on the path to intelligence
But could widespread death have been just as important
Einstein said God doesn't play dice with the universe
Well, it seems that he does and there's a whole lot of dice going on in the evolution of life
Paleontologist Peter Ward is an expert on mass extinctions. The catastrophic change is a fortune in the game of life
When the majority of animals lose and just a few inherit the earth
This is a mammal-like reptile
Actually called a glorg an OPS Ian or a Gorgon. It was the biggest and baddest carnivore of the late. Permian
252 million years ago and this is a baby. The big ones were three metres to 4 metres long very large skulls
crossed between a lion and
A big saltwater crocodile if you will half reptilian half mammal all nightmare
these guys all died out in the
Permian extinction 252 million years ago this entire group gone
The Permian extinction was the most devastating of the five mass extinction events in Earth's history
Experts believe an intense surge of volcanic activity led to dropping sea levels acid rain and
poisoning of the atmosphere
More than 95% of marine life and over two-thirds of terrestrial animals were completely wiped out
we setting the stage for the evolution of life on our planet the
Permian extinction did far more than just the top carnivore it took out the herbivores that took out most of the
Plants it took out the insects the amphibians, but what did get through were a couple small?
reptilian groups real small size
Like pruning a rose cutting back the Tree of Life gives rise to rapid growth as
New branches reach out their leaves to the light
with little competition or threat from predators
surviving species adapt quickly to fill the gaps left behind
The tiny reptiles that survived the Permian extinction drooled to hundreds of different species including dinosaurs
Who ruled the earth for over?
100 million years
until their own date with disaster arrived
I mean that was a very rapid and hideous death probably every dinosaur dead within three to six months max
That was a line in the sand who wins?
Well who won are the small creatures?
the T Rexes died out and tiny mammals get through and then they
developed into all of the kinds of mammals we see today and they did so really fast the size of the skull of the
Animal that gave rise to us was the size of a robin egg or smaller
Might the evolutionary branch that led to us never have grown had it not been for the random impact of an asteroid
million years ago, I
Would support the idea that in fact if we still had not had the impact something else might be running around as intelligent
But I doubt it would be in this form and the set of behaviors that we humans have
If our own existence is the outcome of a random cosmic disaster
Then might the fraction of worlds that evolve intelligence be equally unpredictable
But if we could go looking for alien intelligence on another planet, how would we recognize it
Well, I think the method of looking for complex behavior in a different planet is to do what behavioral scientists do you look you
Observe you see how animals move how they respond to stimuli how they act as a biologist. Who does this?
Regularly, I find that extremely exciting because the discovery quotient would be very high
But it would also be weird and alien, I sort of like weird in aliens. So I think that would be a lot of fun
Professor Roger Hanlon is an expert on the closest thing to a lien intelligence on earth
Cephalopods squid octopus and cuttlefish
the undisputed masters of disguise because they have to be
Cephalopods are soft-bodied
All their armor was given away through evolutionary time to their cousins the oysters and the clams and they are soft body
They're extremely vulnerable. So they have to get on by their wit's they have to do something different
They're making that decision in
Far less than one second and about one. Third of one second. They're assessing that visual scene now, they're orchestrating in their skin
30 million Carano for pigment organs in the skin that create the pattern and iridescent
Reflective cells and even the skin Capelli in the bumps. There are several thousand of those so that takes a lot of cognitive
processing a lot of brain power
Cephalopods have the highest brain to body mass ratio of all invertebrates and their brains are decentralized
Meaning neural tissue is distributed throughout their body
Having split from our only group of vertebrates well before the Cambrian explosion
They are the product of an entirely separate experiment in the evolution of intelligence
If you look at the evolutionary history of complex behavior
We know about vertebrates and humans and primates and all the rest but through evolutionary time
There's only one group that is branched off to produce really complex behavior. And it's these animals the squid octopus and cuttlefish
So what we expect is for the white square to show up in the white head bar the white head bar is already there
And now it's changing its pattern a little more
It's blanched a little bit. You can see these two markings down here, but we're looking for that white square to appear. I
think the correlation you might make for looking for
extraterrestrial intelligence would be
Don't expect anything like humans or dogs and cats and all the things we're used to hear underwater. You have this weird
Octopus with its head on its feet and distributer brain, but they're doing complex things
We might find something very similar in a different planet
It might be a different size a different shape and it's form of intelligence may be different as well
So I think we have to open our minds and recognize the diversity on this planet to set the stage in the framework for going
To other planets to look for life-forms and intelligence
Night falls I may never be
and
A secret wealth is revealed
Bioluminescent organisms rise from the earth
Winged insects resembling lampyridae
Complex life exists on land but hidden from the Sun a
Predator breaks, its camouflage and reveals a nocturnal hunting ground
Since the 1960s when Frank Drake drafted his equation the search for extraterrestrial intelligence
has been defined in terms of the search for a
technological civilization
Being unable to travel to the Stars Drake's solution was to scan for signals that our earthbound
technology could detect
Hence, the penultimate unknown in his equation the fraction of intelligent civilizations that develops technology
The key here is the ability for that civilization to be detected by us
And so that is really going to require some kind of world girdling industrial civilization, right?
so, you know if there was a Roman Empire on this distant planet
We really would have a very hard time seeing it but once they start generating and or start deploying
Industrial-scale technologies on a global scale then we think that there is going to be ways we would be able to see that
The new technology when the Drake Equation was formulated was the radio
Telescope and those who search for extraterrestrial life today
still believe an alien radio signal is what we're most likely to detect I
Think I get comments at every party I go to not that I go to a lot of parties
However, people say oh you're looking for radio waves from et. I mean that's pretty old-school, isn't it? They won't be using radio
Well, tell me what's better
I mean as far as we know there really isn't anything better because radio waves can traverse the distances between the stars
so the signals can get here and
Radio goes right through the gas and dust that hangs between the stars so you can send radio signals as far away as you want
Seth Shostak has spent his life listening to the stars
As
senior astronomer at the Institute for the search for extraterrestrial
Intelligence or SETI?
It's his job to scan the heavens for alien technology
We try anything we can to pick up some
Information some sort of signal that would tell us, you know
We don't know what they're like or what their taste in music. Is there anything like that?
But what we do know is that they're smart enough to build a radio transmitter, for example
With limitations on technology time and resources the dilemma for SETI has always been where to listen
We haven't heard anything, I mean this would be straight up about that and some people think
Yeah, the reason you haven't found on anything is because there's nothing to find. We're the smartest things in the universe
Well, I don't think it's true
I think the reason that we haven't heard anything is simply because we have only looked at a very small number of star systems
but that's changing because of the improvements in technology instead of looking at a
Couple of hundred star systems every year you'll be able to look at a couple of thousand and then five years down the road
It'll be tens of thousands and in the next two thousand years
We'll be able to look at on the order of a million star systems
Now if you look at a million star systems the chances of finding something are not so small
So I bet everybody a cup of coffee will find et within two dozen years. I could be out a lot of coffee
For almost 50 years since Drake wrote his equation we listened
but nothing we heard couldn't be explained as interference or a natural phenomenon until
one day in
2007 in rural, Australia
Astronomers picked up the first in a series of mysterious signals that still puzzled the science community today
But first we didn't dare believe they were real
Fortunately, I've seen them with my own eyes. I saw the very first sweep of the first one could sleep that night
it was like could this possibly be real this is amazing and
We've been able to work out how far away they are in the universe and they're
Impossibly far away, they they're billions of light-years away. So the process that creates them is so energetic
That is great mystery as to what causes them
The strange signals have been dubbed fast radio bursts
Blasts of radiation so powerful. They emit the energy of
500 million suns
Professor Matthew bales leads an international effort to study the phenomenon here at the Milan low
Observatory fast radio bursts are these mysterious
Bursts of radiation that only happened for a few milliseconds the sky lights up and then they go away again
they're about a million times more luminous than
Anything we've known about in our own galaxy
Since the first detection in 2007 there have been more than 40 fast radio bursts detected worldwide
Five in just the last year were detected here by bales
One of the Holy Grails is to find a repeating fast radio bursts
And is there any pattern to the fast radio bursts do they come in?
Special gaps or they regular if they're very regular we might associate that with a rotating neutron star
Where a sort of death Ray's going past the earth, you know once every 20 seconds or something
if they come at irregular intervals, or if they came separated by a code that
showed us that there was some higher
Intelligence behind it. You might think there's an intelligent
Civilization that's actually transmitting this signal
That would be Nobel prize-winning stuff
Of course the next question then is could we or should we send a message back
If we took our biggest radio telescope
We could actually mimic what a fast radio bursts would look like and if we were trying to communicate with other
Intelligent beings we might imagine that they go through a stage of their evolution
Where they're searching for fast radio bursts in the same way. I am here and
Then if you could find one that repeats and find a pattern that might be a way of
doing into civilization
Communications which is a fascinating
think
But we're really interested is a civilization like ours an industrial civilization that show signs that in building tools
You know of whatever kind they have
Gotten to the point where they clearly have a kind of
Reasoning rational intelligence a culture that we might be able to talk to them
Right because that's really what we want to know
We want to know like what's it like to be them because all we know is what's it like to be us?
If I received a signal from outer space, how could I tell it was language as opposed to anything else?
To put a figure on the fraction of civilizations that develops communication
We need a way to decipher if an alien signal is actually trying to tell us anything
I analyzed
over 60 different languages
Human languages plus languages like dolphin Jim the birdsong
So on the left here you've got Neil Armstrong speaking from the moon
On the right here we put a dolphin communicating
You can see here quite easily the rhythms going on the sounds we're making
How similar those constructs are it's picking up those rhythms in those interrelationship patterns that I think are
fundamental to any communication whether it's on this planet or in another planet and
Looking at the complexity of all those patterns into relay. You can actually tell how intelligent the author is
When the signal arrives it's first checked against known sources of interference
It's a pulsar
That repetitive
Sound going on listening to that we were at that's not little green man. That's too simple
Algorithms then scan for the telltale patterns of communication whether its source, maybe an audio recording
or an intergalactic email
It's an awfully big sky, we're getting more and more
Capability online the hardware to do it
But I suspect unless we eavesdrop on something. It may be a while before we hear anything
We want to be ready for it. It says no point just
Sitting back and saying oh well do saying when it happens is doing all this
Ahead of time. So we're prepared for
Again, it could happen tomorrow. We just don't know
Recent advances in the remote observation of planetary atmospheres have opened up a new method of determining whether an
exoplanet hosts or has previously hosted a
technological civilization
the composition of the atmosphere can provide us with a hint about the
Intelligent or perhaps not so intelligent life that pollutes the atmosphere
with
industrially produced molecules
Pollutants such as chlorofluorocarbons are released into Earth's atmosphere by industrial processes and do not occur naturally
Detecting them in an alien atmosphere would therefore be a clear footprint of technological life?
Some of these molecules exist for tens of thousands of years
After they were introduced to the atmosphere in principle
We can find evidence for a civilization that is no longer in existence on the surface of that planet
We can find graveyards of other civilizations
My drones have picked up a disturbance in the communications field a
Sporadic interruption to the network
Is this what caused it
Some geometrical formation metallic magnetically charged
Part of a larger configuration which seems to bear the mark of design
Could these be the ruins of Amina?
realization
the tombstone of an alien intelligence
The final factor in the Drake Equation is El the average lifetime of a civilization and
In some sense. This is the most difficult
Term to even think about because we've got, you know only one example and we don't even know what our own future is
when Drake conceived his equation in
1962 our own global civilization was on the brink of disaster as the powers of East and West
faced off in the Cuban Missile Crisis
The group that came up with the Drake Equation at that first workshop for them in 1962
The great fear was nuclear war and at the end of the conference
Otto Struga, who was the head of
The Observatory where the conference is being held made a toast and said, you know 2l may it be very long?
The Cold War did eventually thaw
But while the nuclear threat is diminished today, we have created for ourselves
new dangers
The question is how long are we gonna last do we only have another two hundred years before we collapse do we have you know?
200 million years in front of us. So this is you know, it's really a fundamental question and it's a fundamental question
For human beings because right now with climate change and sustainability
We really face this existential crisis about really are we going to be able to make it through to more than another?
100 or 200 years
Could this be the ultimate limiting factor in the Drake Equation
That before technological civilizations work out how to search for life among the stars
They destroy themselves
In order to become a truly a spacefaring race that takes a lot of time to be able to really have settlements on Mars
To really start to begin to have a human presence in the solar system
Will take hundreds of years and you know, if we can't make it more than a couple hundred years clearly you're not
You know
We're not gonna develop that kind of society and then to ever really think about getting to the Stars
Sending probes to the Stars being around for the signals to come back. You have to last a long time. I
Think those two things are intimately connected and you don't get the stars unless you get the Earth
I prepare for my final transmission back to earth
The data I've collected will take five years to arrive longer to download and
Generations to fully comprehend
I could provide a summary but what should I say?
I have found everything you've hoped for and also what you feel
I have seen life of marvelous complexity and the traces of a devastating loss
I could say Minerva is your second earth and
I hope
one day
You get to see
You